---
layout: post
title:  Kathy Sierra of Serious Pony on Trolls
date:   2014-10-08 08:23:47 +0300
# image:  02.jpg
# tags:   Home
---

Post by Christopher Allen. original layout



Life With Alacrity
A blog on social software, collaboration, trust, security, privacy, and internet tools by Christopher Allen.

Christopher Allen
about 8 years ago

I don't like forwarding negative topics on social networks such as Facebook, largely because of an internal intuition that has since been confirmed scientifically about how emotions are contagious ( http://www.scientificamerican.com/…/facebook-emotions-are-…/ ). Instead, I prefer to focus on solutions and the positive.

However, this particular article crossed my domains on so many different levels I felt a need to pass it on.

• I have a career of owing, moderating and partici... See more
seriouspony.com
Trouble at the Koolaid Point
[Note: I didn't want to have to write this. But here it is. I'm not linking it to the blog, and it won't likely stay up long, but you are welcome to contact me here if you want to put it somewhere else before I take it down. It is long and rambling and unedited and one of the few things I've written…
[Note: I didn't want to have to write this. But here it is. I'm not linking it to the blog, and it won't likely stay up long, but you are welcome to contact me here if you want to put it somewhere else before I take it down. It is long and rambling and unedited and one of the few things I've written…
12
	
9
	
3


**Kathy Sierra of Serious Pony on Trolls**

October 8 2014 - 100 Words
by Christopher Allen

**original layout**

[Security]() [Social]() [Software]() [Social]() [Web for Social Change]() [#SW4SX]() [Web/Tech]()

Life With Alacrity

© Christopher Allen
